Here it is cleaned and line-broken only. No wording changed — just whitespace fixed and numbers/artifacts removed.

---

arsa an cailleach:

From the depths of the sea of Fodhla,
Two krakens from the depths of Loch Mara,
Two selkies from the shore of Inis Fail,
Four sea-maidens from the glistening bay,
Two kelpies from the waters of Loch Cuan,
Two *tursach* from the isle of Ard Eireann,
Two merrows from the coasts of Dun Nua,
Two *finnbheara* from the caves of Donegal,
Two sirens from the cliffs of Clew Bay,
Two leviathans from the deep of Magh Mara,
Two *siabhra* from the waves of Seire Muire,
Two *faoladh* from the sands of Muir Bhreac,
Two owls from the woods of Glanree,
Two *eacna* from the lake of Eochaill,
Two spirits from the mist of Glen Da Lough,
Two *crom cruaich* from the hills of Slieve Bloom,
Two *pucas* from the marsh of Magh Eochaidh,
Two *banshees* from the glen of Fionn Uisce,
Two *sidhe* from the grove of Tír na nÓg,
Two *firbolgs* from the plains of Magh Tuireadh,
Two *tuatha* from the lands of Éire,
Two *aoife* from the shores of Inis Meain,
Two *fuath* from the river of An Rí,
Two *cait sidhe* from the fields of Éirinn,
Two *fomorian* from the depths of Magh Itha,
Two *dullahan* from the paths of Slí na mBan,
Two *bansidhe* from the meadow of Glas Gaibhnenn,
Two *dearg-due* from the valley of Slieve Aughty,
Two *leannán sídhe* from the isle of Inis Fada,
Two *bean nighe* from the brook of Dubh Linn,
Two *clurichaun* from the vineyards of Magh Cuilinn,
Two *fear gorta* from the hills of Sliabh na mBan.

With these tokens borne from the nether realms,
A message to the chieftains of Éire sent,
A warning from the ancient ones,
The Formorians stir, and with them,
A storm of shadows looms on the horizon,
For those who heed not their presence,
Shall find their lands consumed by night.
Thus, from the deep and dark, they rise,
To claim the earth above.

---

What art those brightened shapes aloft,
O wise Connal of the far-seeing eye?
In yon skies, where stars do dance,
What tales doth the Fomorian stars unfold?

'Tis Balor's gaze that doth pierce the night,
And Ethniu's form beside him stands;
Of olden wrath and battles fierce,
Their light recalls the clash of swords.

What constellations mark the south,
O Connal, keeper of ancient lore?
With gleaming eyes and fiery breath,
What might the heavens now reveal?

'Tis Tethra bold, the stormy king,
And Bres, who once the Tuatha ruled;
Their stars align in tumult bright,
A testament to battles past.

And what dread forms to the west arise,
O Connal, teller of the sagas old?
With shadows deep and glimmers pale,
What do these stellar wraiths portend?

'Tis Indech's host, a fearsome sight,
And Elatha's grace, a spectral glow;
Their courtly dance upon the dark,
A tale of power lost and gained.

What of the northern sky's array,
O Connal, sage of legends grand?
What storied figures take their place,
In yonder tapestry of night?

'Tis Fomor's court, in majesty,
Where giants tread in cosmic bounds;
A skyward realm of mythic might,
Where ancient echoes still resound.

Tell me now, O Connal wise,
What lessons speak these starry forms?
In tales of yore and constellations bold,
What wisdom shines from Fomorian skies?

The stars, they whisper of the past,
Of battles won and kingdoms lost;
In their eternal, twinkling dance,
The ancient spirits find their voice.



 a warrior’s blade.
~/lit ᐅ cx coire.txt 1200 1310 "formorian constellations"
What art those brightened shapes aloft,
O wise Connal of the far-seeing eye?
In yon skies, where stars do dance,
What tales doth the Fomorian stars unfold?

'Tis Balor's gaze that doth pierce the night,
And Ethniu's form beside him stands;
Of olden wrath and battles fierce,
Their light recalls the clash of swords.

What constellations mark the south,
O Connal, keeper of ancient lore?
With gleaming eyes and fiery breath,
What might the heavens now reveal?

'Tis Tethra bold, the stormy king,
And Bres, who once the Tuatha ruled;
Their stars align in tumult bright,
A testament to battles past.

And what dread forms to the west arise,
O Connal, teller of the sagas old?
With shadows deep and glimmers pale,
What do these stellar wraiths portend?

'Tis Indech's host, a fearsome sight,
And Elatha's grace, a spectral glow;
Their courtly dance upon the dark,
A tale of power lost and gained.

What of the northern sky's array,
O Connal, sage of legends grand?
What storied figures take their place,
In yonder tapestry of night?

'Tis Fomor's court, in majesty,
Where giants tread in cosmic bounds;
A skyward realm of mythic might,
Where ancient echoes still resound.

Tell me now, O Connal wise,
What lessons speak these starry forms?
In tales of yore and constellations bold,
What wisdom shines from Fomorian skies?

The stars, they whisper of the past,
Of battles won and kingdoms lost;
In their eternal, twinkling dance,
The ancient spirits find their voice.
~/lit ᐅ cx coire.txt 1200 1310 "formorian omens stargazing"
What signs dost thou perceive in the night,                                                                                                             O wise seer of the ancient lore?
Through the darkened veil of sky,
What whispers the firmament to thee?                                                                                                                    
'Tis the gaze of the Formorian kin,
The giants of the shadowed deep;
In their wake, the stars doth shiver,
And the moon hides its silver face.                                                                                                                     
O tell me, learned watcher of worlds,
What omens stir in the heavens vast?                                                                                                                    What fate do the Formorians weave
With their dark and dreadful gaze?

In the north, the stars entwine,
A serpent's coil, a warrior's bane;
Blood-red Mars doth blaze with ire,
Portending strife and battles grim.

Turn thine eyes to the western expanse,
Where a comet's trail doth scar the night;
Its fiery tail a warning bold,
Of harvests lost and warriors woe.

In the east, the twin stars dance,
A shadowed dance, a mournful dirge;
Their light obscured by veils of dread,
Promises of sorrow yet to come.

O seer of skies, what shall we do,
To avert the doom that looms so near?
What offerings might quell the wrath
Of those who dwell in shadowed seas?

'Tis said, a sacrifice must be made,
Of ancient stones and whispered prayers;
To appease the Formorian gaze,
And turn aside their baleful plans.

Thus, we gather by the standing stones,
With offerings of grain and blood;
With voices raised to the heavens above,
We seek the mercy of the ancient ones.
Here it is cleaned and line-broken only. No wording changed — just whitespace removed and wrapped for readability.

---

What hero shall we call upon,
Against an omen dark and wretched;
To stand firm with valor's might,
And defy the shadows' blight?

Is it Cian of the steadfast heart,
Whose courage never falters;
A shield in battle's raging storm,
Against foes, a bulwark unyielding?

Or perhaps Conn of the silver tongue,
Whose words weave spells of power;
To turn the tide of fate's cruel hand,
And bring forth light from darkest hour?

Speak, O Seer, in whispers low,
Of heroes clad in ancient glow;
Whose deeds are sung in hallowed halls,
And whose names the bards extol.

Shall we choose Bran, fleet of foot,
Who dances 'midst the spears and swords;
His laughter mocks the very doom,
That seeks to bind us all in gloom?

Or Fionn, of the eagle's eye,
Whose arrows pierce the heart of night;
A guardian of this sacred isle,
With wisdom deep and vision bright?

Tell us, O spirits of the glen,
Which hero shall rise, again and again;
To face the omen with unbending will,
And with their courage, the darkness kill?

---

What dost thou see, O sage of the stars,
In the celestial dome above us?
Speak, for the night is laden with whispers,
Tell of omens that portend the rise.

Lo, in the heavens, I see a shadow,
A form obscured by mist and gloom,
'Tis the visage of the Formorians,
Ancient foes of Erin's proud sons.

By the light of the waning moon,
Their grim ascent is marked by signs,
The stars align in patterns strange,
Foretelling doom upon this land.

See there the comet with fiery tail,
A herald of their coming wrath;
The skies themselves do tremble and weep,
As the sea churns with restless might.

Great Connal, wise in the ways of war,
What counsel hast thou for these times dark?
Shall we muster our kin, our swords unsheathed,
To stand against the tide that rises?

Fear not, for valor shall light our path,
Though the Formorians rise with power fierce;
With courage and cunning we shall stand,
To guard fair Innisfail from night.

Rally the clans from hill and dale,
The warriors bold with hearts untamed;
Let the sound of the war horn echo loud,
Across the hills and through the glens.

For though the omens do forebode ill,
We shall not yield to shadow's grasp;
With strength of arm and spirit bright,
We shall send them back to the depths whence they came.

So mark the stars and heed their tale,
Yet let not fear thy heart consume;
For Erin's sons shall e'er prevail,
And light shall banish the encroaching gloom.

So rise, ye who would join the fianna,
And step boldly into the legend that awaits thee.
In the land of Éire,
Where the bards sing and the fires of old burn bright,
Thy destiny calls.

---

Who shall join the Fianna, noble and fierce,
In lands where the rivers sing sweetly?
Whose strength shall fill us with awe and fear,
As we battle 'neath skies cloudy and grey?

'Tis Aedh, the stalwart, of mighty arm,
Whose fame doth echo in the glens;
His spear swift as the tempest's wrath,
A thunderous foe, unmatched and bold.

And see there, Muirenn, of flaxen hair,
Her beauty as bright as Lugh's own light;
Yet do not mistake her gentle grace,
For her arrows strike true as the hawk's dive.

What of Cael, the seer with eyes so keen,
Who foresees the paths of friend and foe?
His wisdom guides us through the mists,
Where danger hides in shadows deep.

And there is fierce Bran, of the hunting hounds,
Who runs with the wolves 'neath the pale moon;
His laughter rings like a battle cry,
As he falls upon foes like a storm-swept tide.

Who shall join the Fianna, to stand as one,
In the halls of Tara, where legends dwell?
Let them come forth, the brave and true,
For the call of the hunt echoes still.

---

Who if not I, do bear the tales of old,
Of battles fought and warriors bold?
In the land where the ancient rivers flow,
'Tis I who recall the deeds of yore.

What shadowed forms dost thou perceive,
Amidst the mists that the morn doth weave?
Great Connal, father of valiant kin,
Reveal to me the fate of men.

Behold the head of Lugh, the swift,
By my hand, he knew his final shift;
His golden locks, now stained in red,
Speak of the valor of the dead.

Who if not I, shall tell of Breas,
Whose strength did rival the tempest's blast?
Yet in his ire, he met his doom,
Upon the fields of Tara's gloom.

Great Connal, tell of the maidens' woe,
In Innisfail, where the fair winds blow;
Do they lament the fallen lords,
Foregone in battle by the swords?

O Evir, my heart does break,
For the sorrow of the lands I partake;
My brothers lost, in the earth they lie,
While I, alone, beneath the sky.

Who if not I, shall sing the lays,
Of blood-stained nights and sunlit days?
By my blade, the foes did fall,
In the shadow of the ancient hall.

Connal, now change thy song of fate,
Speak of the peace we hope to create;
For in the end, when all is done,
May our hearts be as one.







d there is fierce Bran, of the hunting hounds, 
 Who runs with the wolves 'neath the pale moon;
 His laughter rings like a battle cry,
As he falls upon foes like a storm-swept tide.                                                                                                                    Who shall join the Fianna, to stand as one,
In the halls of Tara, where legends dwell?
Let them come forth, the brave and true, 
  For the call of the hunt echoes still.
 ~/lit ᐅ cx coire.txt 1200 1310 "who if not I"
Who if not I, do bear the tales of old,
Of battles fought and warriors bold?
In the land where the ancient rivers flow,
'Tis I who recall the deeds of yore.

What shadowed forms dost thou perceive,
Amidst the mists that the morn doth weave?
Great Connal, father of valiant kin,
Reveal to me the fate of men.

Behold the head of Lugh, the swift,
By my hand, he knew his final shift;
His golden locks, now stained in red,
Speak of the valor of the dead.

Who if not I, shall tell of Breas,
Whose strength did rival the tempest's blast?
Yet in his ire, he met his doom,
Upon the fields of Tara's gloom.

Great Connal, tell of the maidens' woe,
In Innisfail, where the fair winds blow;
Do they lament the fallen lords,
Foregone in battle by the swords?

O Evir, my heart does break,
For the sorrow of the lands I partake;
My brothers lost, in the earth they lie,
While I, alone, beneath the sky.

Who if not I, shall sing the lays,
Of blood-stained nights and sunlit days?
By my blade, the foes did fall,
In the shadow of the ancient hall.

Connal, now change thy song of fate,
Speak of the peace we hope to create;
For in the end, when all is done,
May our hearts be as one.
~/lit ᐅ
[0] 1:npm  2:vim  3:[tmux]* 4:vim-v





Understood — no edits to wording, no added context, just whitespace cleaned and broken into short readable lines.

---

When the mists hung low upon the emerald hills of Éire,
and the winds carried whispers of ancient tales,
a hero rose to stand against the dread Formorians.

This hero, noble and fierce,
bore the name of Conall,
a name that rang like the clash of iron on iron,
reverberating through the annals of time.

The Formorians, those dark marauders
from the shadowed seas,
had cast their baleful gaze upon the fair lands of Erin,
seeking to bind her people in chains of despair.

With eyes like smoldering coals
and hearts as cold as the northern winds,
they came,
sowing terror and destruction in their wake.

But Conall, son of the mighty Cormac,
was not one to cower before such doom.

With a heart ablaze with righteous fury,
he took up his spear,
its shaft as straight as the ancient oaks of Tara,
and its tip as sharp as the biting winds of Samhain.

Clad in armor that gleamed
like the morning sun upon the dew-kissed fields,
he set forth,
a beacon of hope against the gathering darkness.

To the shores of Magh Muirthemne he journeyed,
where the Formorians had landed,
their ships like great leviathans
resting upon the sands.

There, amidst the cries of battle
and the scent of salt and blood,
Conall met their champion,
Balor of the Evil Eye,
whose gaze alone could turn warriors to stone.

With the swiftness of the falcon
and the cunning of the fox,
Conall did engage.

He danced through the fray,
his spear a blur of death and justice,
striking down all who dared to stand before him.

The fields ran red,
but it was the blood of the invader,
not the defender,
that stained the earth.

"By the strength of my forefathers
and the grace of the Tuatha Dé Danann,
I shall not fail!" cried Conall,
as he faced Balor upon the hill of destiny.

With a single, mighty thrust,
he pierced the heart of the beast,
and the land itself rejoiced,
shaking off the chains of the Formorian curse.

Thus did Conall achieve his triumph,
the fields of Erin blazing brightly
with the light of freedom once more.

Songs were sung of his deeds,
and his name was etched into the stones of Tara,
to be remembered for all time
as the hero who stood alone against the Formorians,
and prevailed.

---

I cross the narrow sea
because I am not ready.

Ireland lies behind me —
The isle of Skye rises before us.

Scáthach waits tall, still,
her eyes are clear and measuring.

I do not speak.

She turns.

I follow.

---

Fergus:
"Lo, the night sky's tapestry,
Spangled bright with stars aglow.
Fenian constellations weave,
Tales of heroes long ago."

Medb:
"Tell, O Fergus, of such stars,
As do shine with warrior's grace.
What bright tales doth heaven hold,
Of the Fianna's storied race?"

Fergus:
"See yon cluster, grand and bold,
High above where ravens soar.
'Tis the Hunter, spear in hand,
Fionn's own light, forevermore.

Near his side, the faithful hound,
Bran doth chase the silver stag.
Ever swift and ever true,
Through the heavens they do brag."

Medb:
"A marvel, this celestial sight,
Such a fair and noble scene.
But what of those stars that hide,
In the shadowed space between?"

Fergus:
"There, the Morrígan's darkened wings,
Cloaked in night, her watch she keeps.
She who whispers fate's cruel song,
In the dreams of those who sleep.

Yet beyond, the Warrior's Shield,
Gleams with light of battle's fire.
There, the sons of Gael do stand,
In the stars, their spirits tire."

Medb:
"Fergus, wise in tales and stars,
What forebodes this nightly sky?
Does it speak of peace or war,
For us here, who under lie?"

Fergus:
"Constellations, ancient, old,
Speak in tongues of mystery.
Yet they weave a fateful thread,
Through our mortal history.

Should the Hound of Ulster rise,
As the stars in line converge,
Fenian tales of old reborn,
In a dance of fate's own dirge."

Medb:
"Then we shall heed the stars' old lore,
Armed with courage, strong and sure.
For as long as stars do shine,
Our own saga shall endure."

---

In the shadowed elder days,
beneath the ancient skies of Ériu,
the Fenian constellations did weave their tales
across the firmament.

'Twas a time when the stars themselves
bore witness to the deeds of heroes
and the whispers of the Tuatha Dé Danann.

O Cian, of the fair visage,
what tales dost thou bring from the night sky?

Speak, if it pleases thee,
of the constellations that guide the Fian on their quests.

Cian:
Behold the Sword of Nuada,
gleaming brightly,
a harbinger of valor and might.

It is said that when the sword doth shine its fullest,
the Fian shall emerge victorious in battle.

Lugh's Spear, with its fiery tip,
doth blaze a path across the heavens.

Woe to him who doth not heed its warning,
for it foretells of strife and conflict to come.

Oisin:
Tell me, O Cian,
of the Great Hound that doth chase the moon.
Is it not the guardian of the Fian,
ever watchful, ever loyal?

Cian:
Indeed, O Oisin,
the Hound of Culann doth roam the sky,
a symbol of loyalty and courage.

It watches over the Fian,
guiding them through darkened woods
and across treacherous moors.

Fionn Mac Cumhaill:
What other portents do the stars reveal, O Cian?
For the night is long,
and the road ahead fraught with peril.

Cian:
The Chariot of the Sun King,
it doth rise in the east,
promising renewal and hope.

Yet beware the Wailing Woman,
who weeps among the stars,
for her tears foretell sorrow and loss.

Thus, the night sky of ancient Ériu
did tell its tales,
a tapestry of light and shadow,
woven with the deeds of heroes
and the whispers of gods.

And the Fenian warriors,
under their watchful constellations,
did tread their fated paths,
their stories echoing through the ages.

---

O Artán, venerated bard of the Fian,
speak now of the constellations
that adorn the night above Éire's valiant host.

What tales do the stars weave
in the tapestry of the heavens?

Artán:
Through the cloak of night, O Dubhfhios,
there emerges the fierce hound of Cú Roí's chase,
guiding the warriors with its gleaming eyes,
ever watchful over the plains of Tír na nÓg.

Dubhfhios:
Tell me, Artán, of the Fenian stars,
those ancient guardians of the hunt,
that cast their light upon our noble deeds
and whisper tales of glory to the night.

Artán:
In the northern sky, O seer of shadows,
lies the spear of Fionn, sharp and true,
pointing ever towards the heart of foes,
its brilliance a testament to courage untamed.

Dubhfhios:
And what of the warrior's shield,
that celestial bulwark against the dark?
Does it not mirror the valor of our kin,
defending the land from shadow's grasp?

Artán:
Aye, the shield shines brightly, O wise Dubhfhios,
a circle of protection in the starry dome,
its rim adorned with victories past,
a beacon for those who march in its light.

Dubhfhios:
Speak now of the queenly crown
that graces the heavens with regal might.
Does it not proclaim the lineage of kings,
a testament to the blood of Éire's line?

Artán:
Indeed, the crown glimmers with the fire of Eamhain,
a circlet of stars that honors the high born,
its jewels are tales of love and war,
binding the fates of heroes to the celestial sphere.

Dubhfhios:
Thus do the Fenian constellations
watch over us with ancient eyes,
their stories woven in the night,
guiding the sons and daughters of Éire
through the ages in their noble quests.

Here it is cleaned and line-broken only — no wording changed, just whitespace removed and lines wrapped for readability.

---

In the shadowed skies o'er ancient Éire's realm,
There dance the stars in constellated grace.
The wise among the Gaels did mark their helm,
And named them with the tales of olden race.

Behold the Chariot of the Fianna bold,
Whose wheels do turn with strength of heroes' might.
The Archer, whose swift arrows ne'er grow cold,
Guides hunters through the dense and moonlit night.

High in the vault, the Hound of Cu Chulainn runs,
Chasing the stag 'cross heavens vast and wide.
His eyes are twin flames, bright as summer suns,
A beacon for the warriors to abide.

The Harp of Dagda, strung with silver light,
Plays silent tunes upon the midnight air.
Its music soothes the weary hearts of knights,
And fills the bards with songs beyond compare.

Lo, in the north, the Cauldron of the Wise,
Brims o'er with knowledge, sought by every sage.
Its gleaming rim reflects the endless skies,
A font of wisdom for each passing age.

The Sword of Nuada, gleaming in the west,
Cuts through the dark with edge of starlit steel.
Its power grants the warriors' hearts no rest,
For battles fierce, their destinies to seal.

These ancient lights, in Gaelic lore entwined,
Guide clans and kin beneath the nightly dome.
Their stories, by the fireside, oft remind,
Of Éire's past, and call her children home.

---

In the ancient land of Éire,
where the mists curl around the emerald hills
and the whispers of the Sidhe linger in the breeze,
there lies a realm of stars and fate,
wherein the warriors and chieftains of yore seek guidance.

This is the domain of fenian astrology —
a tapestry woven in the night sky,
revealing destinies and omens
to those who dare to seek.

Beneath the silvered glow of the full moon,
the druids gather,
their robes billowing like the clouds that drift above.

Their eyes, sharp as the hawk's gaze,
turn skyward to read the celestial script.

Here in the sacred grove,
amid the ancient oaks and whispering leaves,
they chant the names of heroes and gods,
beseeching the stars to unveil their mysteries.

"Lo, the Red Branch does tremble,"
intones the elder druid,
his voice a deep rumble that echoes through the glade.

"The warrior's path shall be paved with blood,
and the hounds of Culann shall howl ere the dawn."

The young warriors, eager and untested,
stand in awe,
their breath caught in their throats.

They know well the tales of Cú Chulainn,
the hound of Ulster,
whose deeds are sung in the halls of kings.

Yet it is the stars that hold their gaze now,
for in the patterns above,
they seek signs of their own fates.

"Beware the constellation of the Boar,"
another druid warns,
his staff tapping the earth in emphasis.

"For when it ascends,
the blood of kings shall mingle with the earth,
and the cries of widows shall rend the air."

The warriors shift uneasily,
for they understand the weight of such portents.

The stars, immutable and eternal,
speak truths that mortals cannot ignore.

Thus they listen closely,
their hearts steeled
for the trials foretold by the celestial dance.

"And yet," the elder continues,
raising his arms to the heavens,
"fear not the shadows,
for within the dark lies the seed of victory.

The Swan shall rise,
bearing the promise of new alliances
and the strength of kin."

Encouraged, the warriors nod,
their spirits buoyed by the promise of hope.

For in the fenian astrology,
as in all of life's great sagas,
there is balance —
a dance of light and shadow,
where the brave may yet carve their names upon the stars.

Thus the druids speak,
their words woven with the magic of the ancients,
guiding the sons and daughters of Éire
through the labyrinth of fate.

Under the watchful eyes of the heavens,
the warriors prepare,
their hearts aflame with the courage of those who have come before,
and the promise of those who shall follow.











Her kin are mighty, of noble stock. 
The spirits of the land know her name.
And the fair folk of the sídhe smile upon her.
Éabha, bridge between worlds,
In her heart lies the truth of the land. 
Éabha, fairest daughter of Éire.
She shall be a light, Guiding the lost.


As teaghlach láidir, de shliocht uasal.
Aithníonn Banba í. 
Áthas na sí í.
Éabha, droichead Tuathail,
Ina gcroí: fírinne tíre.
Éabha, iníon Éireann is áille.
Beidh sí ina solas, dóchas an té caillte.
